## Initializing a Repository and Making Commits

Before diving into our main objective which is initializing git and making commits, lets start by introducing Git.

### What is Git

Git is a distributed version control system. This is a typical definition you will find on the internet. But lets break it down further. Git essentially solves the problem of sharing source code efficiently and keeping track of changes made to source code.

Before Git, there were other technologies available that solves this problem a good example is **SVN**.

The way that SVN solved this problem posed some challenges. In SVN there exist a central source code repository. Every change by developers is made against this central repository. This setup makes it difficult for developers to collaborate because changes can only be made one at time. Secondly if for any reason the central server goes down or is not reacheable that effectively blocks the developers.

Git adopted a different approach. It allows developers make their own copy of the central repository. That is why is referred to as a **Distributed** Version Control System.


### Initializing a Git Repository

Before initializing a git repo you must have installed git in your computer. 

Click on this [Install Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads). Choose your operating system, could be windows, mac, or even linux. Download and install git in your computer.

Now to initialize a git repo follow these steps:

- Open a terminal on your computer, eg git bash,

- On your terminal create your working folder or directory eg DevOps folder using this command `mkdir DevOps`

- Change or move into your working directory or folder using this command `cd DevOps`

- While you are inside the folder, run `git init` command


### Making your first Commit

In the last section we successfully created our working directory and initialized it a git repository. Now we will make our first commit.

Before making our first commit lets try to understand what a commit is in git. Commit is more or less saving the changes you made to your files. Changes can be adding, modifying or deleteing files or text.

When your make a commit, git takes a snapshot of the current state of your repository and saves a copy in the .git folder inside your working directory.

Now lets make our first commit by following these steps:

- Inside your working directory create a file index.txt using this command `touch index.txt`

- Write any sentence of your choice inside the text file. Afterwards, save your changes.

- To commit your changes to git, run the command `git commit -m "initial commit"`

The -m flag is used to provide a commit message. The commit message is a nice way to provide context about the commit. When writing a commit message, make it descriptive as possible. Let it explain why the commit was made.