## Introduction to Shell Scripting and User Input

In our git course, we have been writing commands on the terminal and getting corresponding output. The commands are instructions to the computer to carryout certain task.

For instance, when we want to clone a git repo, we type the command `git clone` and pass in the link to the repository. In less than no time we see the repo downloaded into our local machine.

Lets say you are given a task to clone 1000 repositories. Yes you can type the `git clone` command 1000 times. That gets the job done. Someone with not so great patience maybe unable to complete the task.

This is where shell scripting commes in. Shell scripting helps you automate repetitive task. We can simply write a script that does the job of cloning the 1000 repositories. We call it once and the job is done. We have the advantage of using it again whenever we are signed same task.

Bash scripts are essentially a series of commands and instructions that are executed sequentially in a shell. You can create a shell script by saving a collection of commands in a text file with a .sh extension. These scripts can be executed directly from the command line or called from other scripts.

### Shell Scripting Syntax Elements

1 Variables: Bash allows you to define and work with variables. Variables can store data of various types such as numbers, strings, and arrays. You can assign values to variables using the = operator, and access their values using the variable name preceded by a $ sign. For example: name="John" and echo $name.

2 Control Flow: Bash provides control flow statements like if-else, for loops, while loops, and case statements to control the flow of execution in your scripts. These statements allow you to make decisions, iterate over lists, and execute different commands based on conditions.

3 Command Substitution: Command substitution allows you to capture the output of a command and use it as a value within your script. You can use the backtick () or the $()syntax for command substitution. For example:date=$(date +%Y-%m-%d)`.

4 Input and Output: Bash provides various ways to handle input and output. You can use the read command to accept user input, and output text to the console using the echo command. Additionally, you can redirect input and output using operators like > (output to a file), < (input from a file), and | (pipe the output of one command as input to another).

5 Functions: Bash allows you to define and use functions to group related commands together. Functions provide a way to modularize your code and make it more reusable. You can define functions using the function keyword or simply by declaring the function name followed by parentheses.

### Lets write our First Shell Script

step 1:  On your terminal, open a folder called *shell-scripting* using the command `mkdir shell-scripting`. This will hold all the script we will write in this lesson.

step 2: create a file called *user-input.sh* using the command `touch user-input.sh`

step 3: Inside the file copy and paste the block of code below:

```
#!/bin/bash

# Prompt the user for their name
echo "Enter your name:"
read name

# Display a greeting with the entered name
echo "Hello, $name! Nice to meet you."

```
A liitle bit about the code block. The script prompts for your name. When you type your name, it displays the text *hello <your name>! Nice to meet you*

step 4: save your file

step 5: Run the command `sudo chmod +x user-input.sh` this makes the file executable

step 6: Run the script using the command `./user-input.sh`
